(playing piano)
Hello, and welcome to another episode of "No Such Thing as a Fish"
a weekly podcast coming to you from the QI offices in Covert Garden.
My name is Dan Shriver, I am sitting here with Anna Chazinski, James Harkin and Andy Murray,
and once again we've gathered around the microphones with our four favorite facts from the last seven days,
and in no particular order, here we go. Starting with you, James.
Okay, my fact this week is that the Great Wall of China is held together by Sticky Rice.
Right.
There's not sure. It's true. How's that possible?
Well, it's the mortar that holds the bricks together.
It must be extremely overcooks, because I don't think that's good Sticky Rice if it's like cement.
Well, what they found is that they've got this kind of mortar, which is half organic and half inorganic,
and the organic compounds in it is something called Amelou Pectin, which is like a starchy stuff
that you would get if you cooked potatoes or rice or whatever.
And they're pretty certain that they got that through cooking Sticky Rice and then extracting this stach
and then just mixing it with lime and making the mortar.
Wow. That's really cool.
I've always thought food would make great cement, because have you ever left sort of the remnants of a wheat-a-bix bowl?
Yeah, wheat-a-bix.
Why are we not using wheat-a-bix to hold buildings together?
You're right. You leave it five minutes. You cannot wash that up now.
It's done. You might as well throw away the bowls.
That is why we're out of croquerie in the office.
It's very cool. So how much of the Great Wall was used?
So the Great Wall started being built 2,200 years ago, and this mortar came in 1,500 years ago.
And so it's not all of the wall, but the main bit, which was built by the Ming Dynasty,
the bit that you kind of see in the photos, that has Sticky Rice in it.
That's all the fancy towers and really good bits of wall.
It's not the like earth and mountains.
Yeah, which aren't even really the Great Wall of China, are they?
I had them described as the Qi Wall, which is about the Qi Wall, which is quite nice.
But it was built in 500 BC, and it's mostly just earth.
But it was really quite effective, because if you're an infantry army trying to cross that,
you can cross it, but A, it'll take loads of time and B, you'll probably have to leave some supplies behind, and it's just a pain.
Yeah, the thing is, that is great, and it's a wall, and it's in China.
So I think we should call that the Great Wall of China, as well.
Yeah, and that was by the Emperor who kind of created China, modern day China, I guess,
who was credible character.
Emperor Qi, Emperor Qi.
And he was a Terracotta warrior's guy.
He was amazing when you look at what he did in one lifetime.
I mean, he killed a lot of people in the process, but it's...
He shouldn't hold that against him.
He had an army of 1.5 million men.
Wow.
Imagine if the Grand Old Duke of York had an army of 1.5 million men.
The hill would be full.
It would be very, very hard.
So we're going to go back down.
Do you know that they've now, they've trying to combat the thing of everyone going on the wall and grafiting it?
And so they've actually created a section that you can legally grafiting now on the Great Wall of China.
Yeah, there's a graffiti corner.
That seems a crazy idea.
I saw that.
I can't quite believe it.
It seems very...
But it does take the fun out of graffiti, though.
Yeah, when it's allowed.
Hey, guys.
Welcome to the cool graffiti area where you can draw what you like on the wall.
So, you know, last week, I think I mentioned that they've just realised there are eight times as many trees as we thought they were on Earth.
Which, if it was edited out, that's a fact for this week's podcast.
There are eight times as many trees as we thought they were.
We've just miscounted.
So, in the same way, they recently measured the Great Wall of China, and it's like three times longer than we thought it was.
We're all the trees behind it.
It's not hiding.
But how did we get that wrong?
So, we thought it was 9,000 kilometres, and then it turns out they've just announced it's 21,000.
So cool. That's half way round the Earth.
That's half the circumference of the Earth.
Wow.
If stretched out.
And it's all sorts of different bits folded in and itself and so on, but yeah.
Yeah, it's lots of different walls, isn't it? It's not actually one proper wall.
Depending on whether you go with James, it's all definitely the Great Wall of China theory.
Every single wall in China, which I consider to be great.
Apparently, so I've been to the Great Wall of China.
Have you?
Yeah.
It's all by.
Have you?
Yeah.
I was reading.
Actually, I wasn't reading.
I saw this in a Carl Pilkington idiot abroad documentary episode where he visited there and he was reading a little pamphlet in it,
where it said, basically, that section most people go to has been renovated so much that it's basically a whole new wall.
It's just it's all new bricks.
So since 1983, that's what people are visiting a sort of 1983 version of the Great Wall of China.
Yeah.
Which is probably safer because so many people are visiting it.
I read somewhere saying it's really ironic that considering it was designed to keep people out,
it's now what are trying as big as tourist attractions, attracts millions of people to it every year.
Yeah.
Was it definitely to keep people out?
I remember once reading that it was a place to collect tax or something.
Yeah, not sure.
Do you know what you're thinking of?
What?
The great hedge of India.
Am I?
Yeah.
So there's India.
There's a huge hedge that runs along and it was a borderline to collect tax on.
And so you'd get to the hedge and there might be someone patrolling the hedge and they would collect tax, something like that.
Did they call the tax the hedge fund?
Oh, nice.
Yeah.
Do you guys know who the first person to be filmed on the Great Wall of China was?
Just in Bieber.
No.
For a movie, sorry, I should say.
Who's closer?
James, James.
Yes.
Steven Segal.
It's so close.
In name.
Steven Segal.
No, so.
Okay.
Steve Cougan.
What?
Steve Cougan was the first ever person to be filmed.
He made a movie called Around the World in 80 Days.
It was the Jules Verne movie.
He's the first person to be filmed in it for a movie.
They got access to it for the first time ever.
It had never been featured in a film before.
Like it had never been performed on it.
Well, if it had been featured, it was just purely a shot as opposed to someone walking
and doing dialogue on it.
Oh, it would have been a set or something.
Exactly.
Yeah.
So on the Great Wall of China, you know the whole thing about whether you can see it from space or not.
So in 2003, China sent its first astronaut, or as they call it, "tyco-nought," because "tyco" is Chinese for space.
They sent the first astronaut up.
Yang Liwei.
And he said, "Guys, I can't see it."
It's never on panic.
And eventually they decided you could see it.
But actually, you can only see it from a really low orbit when the weather's good.
And if you've got a powerful telephoto lens.
They should paint it pink.
Yeah, they should do something different.
Because it's quite, they do really care about it.
Every single Chinese astronaut that has been up has been given the role of looking for the Great Wall of China
and has failed to fight.
So the photos that they did get, the astronaut who took the photos where you could see it.
If you looked really closely and sort of blew it up quite to a big photo.
He said he just didn't know if it was in the photo at the time when he took it.
So it was by coincidence that he managed to get it.
And in 2006, someone went on television in China associated with their space program.
And this is what he said.
He said, "We need to carry out more tests and improve astronaut training."
So that's like still their main focus.
No, we don't want to ride it off just yet.
But do you know when it dates back to?
Back to before.
Astronauts.
Well, the earliest I found is Ripley, I believe it or not, fame.
In 1932, he said that it's the mightiest work of man.
It was the only one that would be visible to the human eye from the moon, which it definitely isn't.
But there was a writer in 1754 called William Stukeley, who said, and this was about Hadrian's Wall,
he said it's a mighty wall of four school miles in length,
which makes a considerable figure on the terrestrial globe and may be discerned at the moon.
Wow.
And that was about Hadrian's Wall.
I know.
But you can barely see from like standing on tibals.
I wonder if Helen Sharman had a look down to see if she could see Hadrian's Wall.
Yeah.
And if not, I think we need to send some more brits up to see if we can see it or not.
Any more training.
Tim Peaks going up.
We could give him a special mission to do it.
That's what I really like, by the way.
The first mention that you could see it from the moon was the Ripley's Believe in a Notbook.
And I didn't realize that Ripley's Believe in a Not was an actual question.
And that's what it feels like.
Okay, so not.
I don't believe it.
It feels like it's an actual.
God, is that what the whole, like 50% of that book we're saying is false.
Maybe we were all reading it wrong, yeah.
So I was looking at a sticky rice because I thought it's surely more interesting,
the Great Wall of China.
So every year in Japan, they eat these sticky rice cakes.
And the health departments had to advise people that before they eat the cakes,
they need to cut them into small pieces, chew them slowly and learn how to perform basic first aid before indulging.
Because so many people keep choking on them.
Wow.
I think maybe it's the same substance that they used to build the Great Wall.
Because it's a big, but there's an epidemic.
Maybe it's trying up and lodging in their throat, like a concrete ball.
Yeah.
You can't swallow it down.
Did you know that an Italian bride recently was rushed to hospital
because people were sharing her with rice as she was exiting the church.
And she got a bit of rice stuck in her ear.
And had to be hurried to the ER.
She was okay.
And it was like a common myth that if you throw rice on the ground, then pigeon leaks it.
Pigeons explode, but it's not true.
Ah!
Have we ever tested it?
No, I don't really want to do that experiment.
It's just on the off chance that Snopes is wrong on this one.
Yeah.
We pause the podcast right now.
It came back 20 minutes later.
Oh my god, there it is.
Plotting guts everywhere.
The pulga square is a mess.
Should we move on soon to our next fact?
Yeah, I have one more thing on the Great Wall.
Yeah.
Just going along the Steve Cougan line.
The first man we think to walk the complete Great Wall of China was an American.
It was an American eventually called William Edgar Gail.
And he was a really incredible guy.
And he trekked across Africa and he traveled along the Yangtze River.
He did all these amazing expeditions.
And no one's heard of him these days.
He was late 19th century.
And when he died, he left $3,000 to commission a biography of himself.
He wrote, "My life has been unusual and the story of it is likely to benefit young people."
Which is very, very confident.
And he wrote the first ever book in the West about the Great Wall of China.
And he said he wanted it to be so good that any historians and future writing about it
would find little to write about unless he pirated our notes.
Just one more thing about rice.
Have you guys heard of Daki Gokuchi?
And I don't know if that's how you pronounce it.
Almost certainly not.
But in Japan, this was a tradition.
In 2008, Sonny became a craze where you get a rice filled bag
and you draw babies face on it.
If you've got a friend, you've had a baby.
And you present that to them as a gift.
And so you try to draw the baby that they've had.
Like an image of it on a bag of rice.
And that's your baby warming present.
That's weird, isn't it?
What purpose is that service?
Is it like in those sitcoms where they give a child like a bag of flour
to look after as if it was a baby?
I had that at my school.
Did you?
Yeah, I went to a really backward school.
It strikes me sometimes when I think,
"Yeah, we had to care for a flower baby in year seven."
Yeah, so do you think maybe it's the same kind of thing
if you look after the rice and don't accidentally boil it?
That means you're okay for looking after babies.
Or if you must accidentally boil one of these two things
that you've just got, make sure it's the rice.
That's very confusing though, because you think,
"Well, I'll have that rice for my supper."
Oh no!
Or it's like, "Well, I need some mortar to put up this brick wall."
Okay, time for fact number two.
And that is Andrew Hunter Murray.
My fact is that the world's largest single-celled organism
can get up to 12 inches long.
That's great.
That's incredible.
Yeah, it's amazing.
What is it?
It's an algae or an algae.
It's called caliper taxifulla.
And it's a single cell.
And yet it gets up to a foot long.
And it has all these different things in it.
So it looks like a plant.
It has these fronds, which look like leaves.
And then it's got little root-like bits as well,
which hold it in place.
But it is one cell.
Wow.
It's so cool.
Yeah, that's really cool.
Single-celled organisms, I've realised,
are much more complicate.
It can be much more complicated and interesting
than you would imagine.
There's one that's recently been discovered
that has kind of what they think of eyes, isn't it?
Which take up about a third of its body.
And it is just one cell.
It's talking about one or weeds.
I sure am.
Yeah.
What are they called?
Oceloids.
I like things.
Little black dots inside the single-celled organism.
And it seems like they appropriate bacteria
to be used as their eye.
Yeah.
Wow.
Yeah, so the cornea, what you would count as a cornea,
is actually a little bacterium.
And the retinob, which what you would think is similar
to a human retina, is actually another bacterium.
That's amazing.
I know.
But then how they become a multi-cellular organism.
That's a good point.
But this was discovered, wasn't it, more than a hundred years ago,
by this guy who saw it under the microscope and said,
"Look, this thing has eyes."
And no one believed him.
And so it was one of those things that we just assumed
it didn't have eyes for another hundred and twenty years.
Do you think he went, "Believe it or not?"
This thing has eyes.
Okay, Frank, we don't believe it.
I saw a fish today with four eyes.
Did you?
What?
Yeah, it's called the four-eye fish.
And it has four eyes.
Is this a beginning of a joke?
No.
Well, aren't you this morning?
It was a query.
I went to the Horniman Museum.
And which has got an aquarium in it.
And yeah, they have one of those things.
There's a four eye fish.
So I think the point is they have kind of two eyes,
like a normal fish.
And the top of one eye is got certain lens.
And the bottom has a certain lens.
So they can see outside the water as well as inside the water.
Is that right?
This is insane.
So cool.
And the joke you were thinking of was I saw a fish with no eyes.
A fish.
Yes.
That's what I thought you were screwing out there.
But you weren't.
It was just an interesting fact.
What do you call a fish with four eyes?
A fish.
Actually, sorry, there's another amazing single-side organism
which does a thing that's kind of similar to that.
And this is called the xenophio-freeze,
which I think was the biggest known single-side organism
before yours came along.
Xenophio-4 means bearer of foreign objects.
And that's because it sort of constructs its own body out of stuff
that's lying around.
So it kind of picks up bits of like dirt and dust
and material off the ground and bacteria.
Like a Mr. Potato Head.
It's exactly like a Mr. Potato Head.
Yes.
Sorry, I just was talking about Mr. Potato Head just a little fact about that.
When Mr. Potato Head came out, it was during rationing in America
and no one wanted to advertise it.
None of the advertisers would advertise it
because they thought it would encourage children to play with their food.
And so until the rationing stopped,
they couldn't really advertise it anywhere.
Or it could encourage children to eat plastic,
which is not advisable.
It had a face on it.
I thought it was a baby.
Sorry, Dan.
No, I was just going to say so there's a DIY living thing
that builds itself as it goes.
Well, it gives itself extensions.
It kind of builds a house for itself.
But in the deep sea,
there are these Xenophio-4s.
There are up to 2,000 every 100 square meters on the sea bed.
Wow.
They're the kings down there.
Yeah.
The kings really once held organisms of the world.
They weigh out number multisallied organisms, don't they?
There are many more of them than there are of us.
Yeah.
So we're animals.
And the very top level of taxonomy is domain.
I think everyone else learned this in your 9 biology,
and I snooze that lesson.
But I don't know.
There are three domains.
And every living thing that you know of fits into one.
So animals, plants, fungi, everything you think of as an animal fits into one.
And then there are two whole different domains for just these bacteria, basically.
Yeah.
Well, everyone else was learning that at school.
Anna was sweeping up flour from the flour.
Just on the idea of, so single-cell organisms,
when I think of that, I just think of the earliest of life.
That's how we all came about, right?
So I was looking into early life and how we came about generally.
And I read about a thing that has been observed in deep space.
750 light years away from Earth.
It's a proto-star.
It's like a sun-like star shooting out these huge bullets of water.
And they actually think that that's how water is getting seeded around the universe
from these kind of stars.
These huge, like, huge amounts of water.
And so they say that if we picture these jets as giant hoses,
and the water droplets as bullets,
the amount of shooting out equals 100 million times the water flowing through the Amazon river every second.
Wow.
And the velocities are reaching 200,000 kilometers per hour.
It's an 80 times faster than bullets flying out of a machine gun.
And they've been observing this.
These huge batches of water coming out of these stars.
And because I did read a long time ago,
there was a theory that maybe the way that Earth got water was from one of these
a huge, just whatever, bullet of water coming towards us.
Wow.
I guess.
Well, do they think maybe comets?
Because comets often have loads of ice on them.
I think an enormous comet might have provided a lot of...
I can't imagine that much water coming just from comets, though.
It's controversial, I think.
Yeah.
Well, this is just a...
This is quite a new report that's come out
where they've observed a proto-star shooting out...
A super-soaker, 59 million.
That's way in the universe.
That's so amazing.
Yeah, I know.
I couldn't believe it.
But you think it's not fully a thing.
I haven't read that.
That's right.
But some people think that water came from space.
Some people think it managed to be made on Earth.
But it might well be true for all I know.
Speaking of early life forms, do you guys know about the boring billion?
No.
The boring billion is a period of time that scientists use to describe
between 1.8 billion and 800 million years ago,
when life just stopped evolving completely
and the whole of Earth, the only life on Earth, was one huge layer of slime.
That is so good.
For a billion years, the boring billion.
Was it like slime mold kind of mebe kind of stuff?
It was what's called a bacterial sheet.
Like a mat kind of thing.
It was like a microbial mat.
Do you still get microbial mats today?
There's a huge patch of them, the size of grease, I think.
Yeah, there's one layer of microbial mats on the bottom of the ocean.
It's just off Venezuela and it's the size of grease
and it can be up to 7 centimeters thick as in bottom to top.
And it's just this incredible web of strands and filaments
and microbes living in these.
They look like little cowpats on the ocean floor.
And there's an area at the size of grease under sea, which is these things.
As excited as Andy is getting about this,
I think he would have loved it in the boring billion.
You should have been living in that time.
I would have caught it in the brilliant billion.
I randomly was flicking through the other day a book by Michael Palin.
On his trip to Brazil and the book's called Brazil.
And he was talking to a guy in the Amazon about deforestation
and so on and when they're actually just chopping down stuff.
And this guy said that the term that they all refer to
when they talk about a size of area that they're deforesting in the Amazon.
They call it one Belgium or six Belgium.
Oh, did I?
Yeah, they use Belgium as the...
We would say Wales, I think.
Like the size of Wales is chopped down every two minutes or so.
Right.
Yeah, so they seem to like, they'll say to each other.
So they kind of use it as an unofficial, it's really good.
You note of measurement.
Yeah.
Something about bacteria.
Oh, yeah.
So the largest bacterium is called Theomargarita Namibiancis.
That's actually quite a pretty name.
It sounds like a parent, it's actually named a child.
It is. I tried to look up if there was anyone called Theomargarita in the world.
There was one guy, he's a football agent or he signed up to be a football agent.
But there's not really much about him.
He didn't seem that interesting.
But yeah, this is the biggest bacteria in the world.
It's big enough to be seen with a naked eye.
And its volume is three million times more than the average bacterium.
And I thought that if you had the average human,
and it was someone who was three million times bigger than that,
it would be about ten times as large as the world's biggest tree.
Wow.
It would be human that size.
Yeah, you don't want to be bullied by that guy.
No.
These things are so cool. So I think it's the thickness of seven pages in a book.
If you hold those together, that's the width.
That's how long they get.
So you can see them.
Another thing about them is that these bacteria,
the world's largest bacteria,
is the same size as the world's smallest snail.
Oh, do they hang out?
Well, that's called Acmella Nanna.
And it was only described this month, November 2015.
It was really you, that snail, and you're like,
"Oh, I feel like I'm just coming down with a bit of a bug."
That's actually the same size as me.
Cool.
And those two are both slightly larger than the very smallest plant in the world,
which is a duckweed, and it gets just 0.6 millimeters.
That's an individual plant.
Oh, wow.
It's tiny.
So I like to imagine all three of them having a little patience.
[LAUGHTER]
This is just one thing I like about, because you mentioned it,
giving things their scientific names, the binomial naming system.
It just struck me the other day, when I read it in a book,
that it's one of the only, maybe the only, universal bit of language.
So wherever you go in the world, you're not going to be able to communicate with anyone,
who speaks language you don't, unless you need to describe a certain type of plant
or a mole or something.
And then you just say, you know, puffinous, puffinous.
And they're going to know exactly what you mean.
They're a zoologist.
I wonder about computer code, is it a bit similar to that, maybe?
Yeah.
The other thing is, apparently, there's one word which is understood by everyone on Earth,
and that's "Huh?"
There was a paper earlier this year saying that this word is "Everyone knows what that means."
"Huh?"
Do you have to make that ridiculous face with it?
But you just made it.
[LAUGHTER]
I wish everyone could see.
Huh?
[LAUGHTER]
I started researching single-celled organisms,
and then quickly stopped because I didn't understand anything about it.
[LAUGHTER]
So I looked at the rest of the fact, which is that the single-cell organism can be up to 12-inch as long.
If you're going to name stuff that's 12-inch as long down,
I don't know if we want to put out this podcast.
Are you about to name other stuff that's 12-inch as long?
Yeah.
Oh, God.
So I started looking into things that are 12-inch as long.
One of the things is that two years ago, Subway got sued,
because customers were complaining that their 12-inch foot-long sandwiches
weren't in fact 12-inch foot-longs.
Wow.
And so you could bring in your single-celled organism to measure it again.
[LAUGHTER]
Exactly.
And someone actually, there was a big-class action lawsuit,
and they were representing customers who'd purchased the six-inch foot-long sandwich.
There's any time between January the 1st, 2003, and October the 2nd, 2015.
So if anyone felt like they were juped and had a bit of proof they could come forward and say,
"Actually, six years ago, I was pretty sure that was a bit shorter than a foot-long."
That was like 11.9 inches.
Yeah, exactly.
And they had to pay up.
So Subway actually paid up with a settlement of $525,000 American.
And now they have to measure all of their bread.
Okay.
But they could have just claimed that, oh, sorry.
When we said foot-long, we just meant as long as Michael's foot.
[LAUGHTER]
It was Michael's foot.
Oh, Michael's foot was much bigger than that.
He was five or six feet, actually, so.
Could I give a really interesting theory, I think, about single-celled organisms that I read today?
It might be quite random.
I only read it in this one study.
Was it a Ripley's believe it or not?
It sure was.
Was it in the second half of the book?
So it's quite a mystery why animals happened.
Why multi-celled organisms happened.
What was it that made single-cells go to multi-cells?
There are various theories.
I like this theory, which is that is because we're able to eat ourselves.
So, so cells need organisms need food to survive, right?
So they eat other cells, other things that are made of cells.
So when cells were all clustered together, if they got hungry, they could just eat their cell next to them.
That they were attached to.
So that meant they never got hungry.
But the cells that were single-celled organisms couldn't fight.
If they got hungry and there wasn't another single-cell nearby, then they just starve to death.
And so suddenly it evolved that it's better to be, you know, multi-celled organisms happened.
Because you could just eat the other bits of yourself.
So you can digest yourself easily without having to go out looking for food.
And that's why they came into being in Sark, the island of Sark.
There is a jail with a single-cell.
You can fit two prisoners in it at a push.
And they have to be a meba.
Do you want to know a cool thing about what I think is the oldest animal on earth?
So any guesses?
It's a tortoise.
Okay.
It was something ocean-based, right?
So that's...
Yeah, like coral.
Bruce Forsyth.
I think.
No, Dan's right on this one.
Oh, Dan.
So sponges are technically animals, which never fails to surprise me.
They are.
In the animal kingdom.
And they look just like sponges.
But there are these giant barrel sponges, which can be up to two and a half meters tall,
and that much across as well, single animals.
And some of those, they think, could be up to 2,400 years old.
Yeah.
Which outstrips anything else.
So you know that you couldn't kill a sponge with your bare hands?
I disagree.
Because if you kind of try and rip it apart or pull it or anything like that, it will just regrow.
So how can they be killed?
Probably.
Let's say with fire.
I thought we were actually bringing them close to extinction because back in the day,
before we used toilet paper, people used sponges.
So we were sort of bottom wiping them to death, basically, as a species.
As in bacteria would then get into the ecosystem.
Is that right?
I don't know.
That implies that we didn't take it off to wipe our asses.
We just sat on a huge lot of sponge on the ocean.
Or you took it out and put it back.
Put it back in.
Okay, reattached it.
In the old days, you had to swim to the bottom of the sea to wipe your bum.
It was so well for the people living next to the Marianas trench.
They called it the Marianas trench.
I've got quite a cool thing on Amoeba, actually, just that.
So there's an Amoeba called the Chaos Amoeba, which I think is quite cool.
Or it's a chaos as a genus of Amoeba.
And it was named by Leneas.
And I think it was the first Amoeba to be seen and named.
And then this reminded me, so Leneas obviously was responsible for seeing a lot of these little species
and naming them for the first time.
And I was reading a book the other day by Colin Tudge, who's amazing, and you should all read his books.
That Leneas, when he went on botanical expeditions, would have a musical band leading the way
and would make everyone dress in really wacky costumes.
Did everyone know that?
And wherever they found the new species, he would like ring a bell or something like that,
or play a two to horn or something.
See, I know you think the boring billion sounds fun, but I think that sounds like a more fun day out.
We're all working out wherein the history we're going to go with our type machine.
Andy's been gone a while.
I said, "How long have you been some slime?"
Okay, time for fact number three, and that is Chuzinski.
My fact this week is that if you're bitten by the boom-slang snake,
you bleed from every orifice.
Frightening. James finds it funny.
I find the word orifice funny.
Yeah, that's pretty terrifying. Even your gums.
Yeah, every part of your body you could bleed from.
Yeah, your gums, your eyes, your nose, your eight, you know, the bits down there.
You're Marianas Strange.
You're Marianas Strange, exactly.
You're Marianas.
Well, okay, I'm never calling it anything else.
Anyway, so this is really horrible.
We shouldn't be laughing.
No, but it's fine. The boom-slang snake, which is quite a cool name,
is not particularly dangerous because it very, very rarely attacks people.
I think it's only killed seven people on record.
But when it does kill you, it has a venom which is called a hemotoxin
which destroys your blood cells.
And the first recorded incident was an expert on snakes who got bitten by him when he was in his lab
and he thought nothing of it because it's just a tiny little bruise.
And he actually, because he was a snake expert, he noted down the symptoms as they went along
and spent the day going, "Oh, my bruise is looking a little bit purple.
I'll get a little tiny bit sore now."
And then he was dead within 24 hours because suddenly about, you know, six to eight hours later,
he started bleeding everywhere.
He was cold, was he?
Yes, I think he was.
Yeah.
And I think was it thought to be harmless at the time, the boom-slang?
So he said, "If he'd been bitten by a snake, then thought it would be dangerous."
He obviously would have been really worried.
But he just thought, "Oh, it's just a boom-slang."
I love so the boom-slang.
So it's killed seven people with its bite.
I reckon it's only seven because it must be such an ordeal for it to actually bite someone properly
because its fangs are located at the back of its mouth.
Yeah.
It's a ridiculous reason that evolution put it back there.
So in order to bite, it has to open its mouth 170 degrees, like this huge.
And then make the bite.
But that's just such an odd placement.
That's amazing.
And they're called backfanged snakes, aren't they?
And they're loads of species of snake, which, yeah, I don't really understand it either.
Supposedly when they bite you, boom-slangs, they have to...
It looks as though they're chewing on their prey.
Supposedly when they bite they prey, it looks as though they're chewing on them.
But actually, all they're doing is working the venom into their prey.
Because they have to open their mouth so wide to get their fangs actually in there,
then they need to...it looks like they're chomping on you.
Have you guys heard of the Japanese tiger keelback?
No.
It is the most badass snake.
This snake is incredible.
And bite you and kill you with a poison, with a toxin.
However, it's a non-venomous snake.
And what it does is it bites poison frogs.
It takes from it the venom and the toxin from the toad.
And then it lets it drip back to its backfangs as well.
And it keeps it in these little, I think, pouches.
And then it bites something and it uses the poison that it's carried over to kill its enemy.
That's insane, right?
That's amazing.
Yeah.
Because it takes a lot of energy to make your own venom, doesn't it?
Yeah, it's actually really clever.
It's much less energy to just go and nick it off someone else and work out with your test tubes inside your body,
how to actually concoct one.
Do they tell each other, though?
Like, do the snakes go...it's cool.
There's no venom, but that toad will give you it.
You just have to put it to your back, too.
How do they pass that knowledge on?
Is it like with beavers?
They just know how to build dams when they're born.
Are they keelbacks, did you say?
Yeah.
So female keelbacks, when they have babies and the babies don't have any venom yet,
they'll find a toad and then collect the venom from the toad and then give it to the children
so that they have some venom when they're first born.
So that might be observational.
It could be, yeah.
Do you guys know how many people would you guess?
I think I told Andy this the other day, so don't answer it.
How many people would you to guess per year are killed by snakes around the world?
Around the world, yeah.
I would say about 100.
How many people do you reckon, Dan?
Oh God, I don't know.
Maybe something ridiculously low, like seven, because we have so much.
It's 200,000.
What?
Really?
200,000 people a year.
They're the most dangerous animal aside from mosquitoes.
And there's a massive health emergency because it's a really unfashionable thing for pharmaceutical companies
to be investing in because everywhere where snakes are dangerous is in rural developing the poorest areas.
And so lots of pharmaceutical companies are stopping producing certain antivenom,
which is killing a lot of people.
But 200,000 people a year.
That's more than you would have expected, right?
That's crazy.
It's insane.
Yeah, there was a guy recently who survived a brown snake attack, which is, I think Australia is most dangerous snake.
He was doing a charity walk and he came across a snake that he thought was dead and it leapt up and it bit him.
But he survived the attack because this entire walk, which was right across a huge walk in Australia,
he was wearing a stormtrooper outfit from Star Wars.
And so it hit the plate on his, on his shin.
And he made all the news at Australia.
I'm not surprised.
Yeah.
And every single news channel that interviewed him asked him if he was a massive Star Wars nerd.
No.
He doesn't even like Star Wars.
It's like, what is Star Wars?
I was just wearing my anti-snake suit.
Wow, amazing.
I read a list yesterday of the 1,295 venomous snakes.
There's a list of them online.
I'm not sure it's all of them, but I think it might be pretty close.
Do you want to hear some of the names?
Yeah, please.
Okay, the Moorish snake.
Moorish with two eyes.
Or like, okay, not as in what you've had one, you just can't stop it.
The tiger cat snake, which I really like because it's like three animals in one.
Yeah.
Yeah, that's a bit like, there's a hawk moth caterpillar, I think.
I think maybe it must get really upset because it's called the hawk moth caterpillar.
And then when it turns into a moth, I reckon it thinks, that must be the things I turn into as I keep going on.
It spends the rest of its life waiting to become a hawk.
Anyway, it's incredible.
If you Google it because it can disguise itself as a snake in order to repel birds.
And so it's like, it's underside, has this pair of false eyes on it.
And it sort of causes itself to become a bit engorged where the snake's head would be.
And if you look at pictures, it looks exactly like the head of a snake.
Except that it's obviously caterpillar-sized.
So I don't know what kind of a frightening snake is three inches long, but it works.
That's great.
They've apparently found out that snakes are actually 70 million years older than we first thought they were.
These snakes sometimes were massive.
One of them, this is what they ate, dinosaurs.
There's a dinosaur eating snake.
That's amazing. Although you did get small dinosaurs back in the day.
I know, but just the word.
Yeah, yeah.
You just imagine it kind of locking its jaws around like a diplodocus.
Yeah, it says it ate small mammals, lizards, and even dinosaurs.
I read quite a cool new story from 1996 about a snake.
And I'm going to say now I wouldn't recommend this because actually for snake bite,
you're not supposed to create a tourney K because that people often think that's the right thing to do.
But actually sometimes that can trap the venom in the wrong place
and then make it more harmful than it otherwise would have been.
However, it does sometimes work in 1996 in Texas.
A man was bitten by a poisonous coral snake.
He killed the reptile by biting off its head and then peeled off its skin and used it as a tourney K to wrap around the injury.
That's amazing.
That's pretty hardcore, isn't it?
Yeah, it is.
You know, they can hear through it.
So I don't know if this is all species of snake, but they can hear through their jawbone.
So their jawbone is on the ground, but what's really interesting is that their jawbone is split into two.
So they can work out the direction because if the left jawbone is going bull or there's a little guy over there.
Yeah, they can suddenly be going, "Oh, okay, left jawbone. All right, let's make a move."
It also has two ways of smelling.
And one is the classic way, you know, classic snake smell way.
The other is through its tongue tasting the air.
That's how it smells.
So when you see a snake and it's kind of sticking out its tongue just like how it's doing now,
it's trying to kind of see if it can taste any predators or prey.
Okay, speaking of being able to hear, do you know the death ade?
No.
Okay, the death ade.
It kills a lot of people, a lot of people are killed by it, but it's not called the death ade because of that.
It used to be called the death ade.
And then it just kind of got switched around.
And it's because when early people went to Australia, they saw it and it never ran away from humans.
And so they assumed that it just couldn't hear the humans.
And so that's they thought it was death.
I like the fact that the death ade became the death ade due to a mishearing.
Basically.
Have you seen footage of the flying snakes?
Oh, yeah, they're amazing.
They go a long way, don't they?
They go a long way.
And their body.
Where are they going to flying to?
So if they're off on a tree, and they want to get to the ground, but they kind of want to cover some distance while they're in the air.
They always fly from somewhere higher to somewhere lower.
Yes.
And never, never the other way.
So it's not, I guess it's more a parachuting mechanism that they do because they flatten their body into a sort of spiral.
Almost like when you see the Olympics, the ribbons that they do when that ribbon display, it's like that.
I mean, birds are still laughing in their faces.
Yeah, but give it a few million years and you won't be laughing when they're flying snakes with wings.
You'll be harking back to that time with the boring billions.
Longing was in slime.
Okay, time for our final fact of the show.
And that is my fact.
My fact this week is that Albert Einstein has a social media team.
Yeah, so he has.
This is a genuinely devoted team who are paid specifically to keep up his Twitter presence.
His Facebook outputs, his Tumblr account.
I did hear his Twitter presence has fallen a bit by the wayside over the past 70 years.
Yeah, so you died.
How does it feel to be less technologically a debt to somebody who's been dead for 50 years?
Yeah, fair point.
So you will see on Twitter that people set up accounts for dead historical characters.
Someone even has done one for God and they run it as if they are God.
Yeah, but that's not a verified account.
Exactly.
So that's the difference.
Albert Einstein has a little blue tick next to his Twitter account because there's a verified account.
He on Facebook has a little tick as well.
He's got 17 million followers on Facebook.
17 million.
So this is Corbis who looks after his output and they have the license to his image.
And as a result of the money that they get from it, he is the fifth most profitable dead person basically.
So I think only people like maybe Kirk Cobain and a few others.
Elvis.
And maybe John Lennon.
Yes. And the fourth is Charles Schultz who drew peanuts.
Really?
Because his books are still so popular and still so loved.
But I was very skeptical about this because I thought this sounds terrible using Einstein's image after his death for profit.
It turns out that actually on his death, he left the rights to his image to the Hebrew University of Jerusalem, which he co-founded.
So he said, you can have the rights to my image after I die and use it to make money for the university.
So they licensed out to Corbis the right to use this image and Corbis take a cut of the money basically.
But most of it goes back to the Hebrew University.
So it is actually an odd way of fulfilling your will or having a charitable legacy.
They actually really care about it.
The guy who runs the team at Corbis says that every day he thinks about what Einstein stands for and what he doesn't stand for.
And then he sends out a tweet or he sends out a Facebook message reflecting what he thinks Einstein might have said about a situation.
Also, he corrects people who misattribute quotes to Einstein.
So Einstein will write back to them.
In one case, he wrote to one of the Kardashians saying, Einstein never said that.
So he's also doing damage limitation on the spread of misinformation.
And I just love the quote. There was a guy at Corbis. Not the guy who actually runs Einstein's account, but one of the managers there, Kevin Connolly, who said, it's not rocket science running Einstein's social media presence.
Yeah, they also point out that no one on the Corbis team has any scientific expertise.
So that yeah, Einstein still gets five to ten requests for an autograph every day.
What?
It's true.
Like people ask on Twitter for his autograph.
I'm afraid I don't have much more detail than that. But I suspect they go disappointed most of the time.
Yeah, Einstein. Those pictures of him from the 30s look old.
And they're in black and white. So you can tell they're a long time ago. How ancient do they think this guy is?
Yeah.
So Einstein is a bit slightly disturbing person, right? Because he seems to have no flaws.
Well, he has one flaw. He has one flaw. But in every other way, he's so great. All these quotes that he said that are also wise and brilliant. He's a great pacifist. He's a genius.
If you read, you know, I think new scientist or scientific American a couple of months ago did the top 10 greatest scientists of all time.
And you can feel they all want to be a bit left field. But in the end, they all say Einstein's the one.
And yet he had this weird relationship with his wife.
So his list of ways that his wife had to behave around him if the marriage was to function is so weird.
So they yeah, they were on the brink of a divorce. And then they decided to hold the marriage together for the kids.
Yeah, and in part of the deal was Einstein wrote this letter to her.
Yeah, it's featured in the letters of notebook. If if anyone has that, you can see it.
So the conditions of him of them remaining together, it was a contract that he wrote up that she had to sign.
And she had to say that she would make sure that his clothes and laundry were kept in good order that he'd get his three meals regularly in his room.
Bedroom and study kept neat stuff like that. But then you were renounced all personal relations with me.
And so far as they are not completely necessary for social reasons, you will stop talking to me if I request it.
That's an insane one.
You will stop talking to me if I request it. I mean, this doesn't mean I can please.
I mean, this doesn't sound like a guy who'd be great on social media if he actually was loud.
He just blocked it basically.
This is what he promises her in return. In return, I assure you of proper comportment on my part, such as I would exercise to any woman as a stranger.
Oh, out. And she signed it.
What an ass.
And then they divorced a couple of years later, I think.
Oh, did they?
All right, couldn't keep it up, kept on yabbering on, didn't she?
Yeah.
Wow.
You know the weirdest thing about that list is it feels really awkward having to say bad stuff about Einstein, but it's true.
It's this is who he was, but you really kind of, I feel almost dirty saying this out loud, but it's kind of, it's just true.
Yeah.
It's odd.
Well, that's because of the expert work being done by the folks at Corbitt, who very rarely tweet.
You will not talk to me if I request it.
So Einstein was also an inventor because he worked in the patents office and he did a few inventions.
My favorite one is a blouse with two sets of buttons, some parallel to each other, so that it would fit both a slim person and a fat person.
It's such a good idea.
It means that you can use the slim buttons, and if you put on a load of weight, then you can use a fat button.
Did he release it into the market or did he just invent it?
He invented it and paid it to it, but no one ever made it.
Because I've got shirt cuffs where you can do the buster.
In case you put a lot of weight on your wrist.
No, like Kate goes straight to my wrist.
Anyway, yeah, he had some other, he painted it a hearing aid, I think, and a refrigerator.
Yes.
Which didn't take off at the time, literally or metaphorically, and wasn't really bought.
But now they're thinking about, we're introducing it because it's very environmentally friendly.
So it's actually was very ahead of his time.
It's not the reason he did it, though. He did it because fridges at the time were lethal.
So they all used gases like ammonia to actually do the cooling of the food or other gases like methyl chloride.
And several people died as a result of these gases leaking out into their homes, basically.
So Einstein was one of several scientists who worked on fixing that.
And in 1925, he co-developed with a former student of fringe, and he paid into it.
But then they invented a non-poisonous refrigerant, which just worked better.
Do you know Yoda was based on Einstein?
No.
The guy who designed Yoda said he based it on a combination of himself and Einstein.
It was Stuart Freeborn.
So hang on, if one element of Yoda is taken from...
Stuart?
Yeah.
From Einstein, it means that Stuart must be two-foot tall.
And the reason.
When Einstein became really famous, and he had lectures, people really wanted to go to lectures,
even though they didn't understand any of it.
And so he would start a lecture, and then stop after five minutes and say,
"I will now pause so that those with no further interest in the subject can leave."
I pretty much everyone would go and just be like two or three people left.
Wow.
In Oxford, I visited it quite a few times.
I didn't understand what I was looking at.
But you can see the chalkboard that Einstein, when he came to England to explain,
equals MC squared.
You can see the chalkboard where all the workings out are on there.
It's quite nice.
It's a weird bit of history to look at.
Although weirdly, and nowhere on the chalkboard does it say E equals MC squared.
So I just have to assume that they're telling the truth.
You were definitely one of the people in the lectures weren't you,
who as soon as you sat down, I was like, "God, five minutes, I've got to wait until he excuses me."
Definitely not here for the science.
Just that thing, I was saying before, about taxonomy being everywhere in the world.
I guess mathematics as well is another one.
Yes.
So any mathematician can talk to each other about maths by just using the symbols.
Yeah.
You know how Einstein's brain was chopped up?
There's now an app that you can get.
And I think it's for doctors, where they've got high res images of the brain.
You can download it, and you can go close into it, and you can just...
And I don't know what purpose it has, because they're not quite sure how it fully fits together.
I would say the main purpose is to get 2.49 of people.
Yeah.
Exactly.
But I mean, that's quite cool.
Just the idea that even his brain is now sort of an app.
Yeah.
Also, interestingly, so just going back to the sort of nautilus side of Einstein.
There's an idea that his granddaughter, who was raised by Hans, which was his son,
was in fact an illegitimate love child of Einstein.
His name was Evelyn.
And she was actually given a bit of Einstein's brain.
And the idea was that she was actually going to do a DNA checkup to see if she was related.
Because she got no money at all.
When it went to the Hebrew University, his likeness and all that stuff, they didn't give her a cut of anything.
And most exciting thing about her, though, is that for a period of about 13 years,
she was married to Grover Krantz, who all the Bigfoot enthusiasts out there will know
is the first scientist to believe in and try to prove the existence of Bigfoot.
Right.
Yeah, so she was associated with two great men.
The constant debate, who has given more to science, Einstein, Grover Krantz.
Can we do a quick thing on social media, on social media, particularly after death?
Yeah.
Because there are companies now which offer to keep tweeting kind of things that you would have tweeted after you die.
So they'll take a sample of all your previous tweets.
And their slogan is, "When your heart stops beating, you'll keep tweeting."
I was reading a story about these firms. There was one businesswoman who had registered her interest in having that.
And she said, "It would be interesting to have a quote, kind of ironic legacy."
But then she said, "But I'm not sure who'd be interested in reading a computer generated me."
In the cold light of day, it is a very conceited thing to do.
Which is very, I think, self-aware.
And there's another one called, "Eternity Me," I think, which you sort of contain your avatar.
So it recommends that if you sign up to it, the best way to have as realistic tweeting as possible after you die
is to properly train up your avatar and feed it with your whole personality.
So give it all your pictures or your tweets.
And then it creates this thing that looks like you and that can speak to people as you would have.
Wow.
It's so mad.
Oh, Brave New World.
Yeah. There's a guy called Joe Vixel-Vikes.
And he is a writer for the Music and Pop Culture website, Death and Taxes.
Sorry, did he say Death and Taxes?
Sorry, go on.
And he's kind of gone on to Hoot Sweets, which is an app which will send tweets in the future.
So you can do it for a tweet next week.
If you're not going to be in the country, it'll just send it.
But anyway, he has got some messages to be sent out in 2086.
And he wants to be the last person to ever tweet.
And he reckons that just Twitter with it being an internet company, whatever.
Or just any company really probably still won't be going in those times.
But he will still have one last tweet.
Oh, wow.
But if Twitter doesn't exist, how will it go out?
Yeah.
You could still post on my space, even though no one's going on there before.
That's true.
What do you mean?
#GetAndTheOffMySpace.
There are some things Twitter accounts that make me really happy.
I'm not on Twitter.
So one of them is the...
One of them is @Streiberland.
Yeah.
@Streiberland is right there on a par with the Big Ben Twitter feeds.
Which is fantastic.
What are you talking about?
Big Ben Clock is so good.
It's great.
At 1 o'clock, it tweets BONG.
At 2 o'clock, it tweets BONG BONG.
And it's been doing that for years, every hour.
That's Andy's favourite Twitter feed.
Yeah, he does do that.
And one that I do like, though, is...
Do you guys...
Have you guys seen Kim Kierke Kardashian?
Kim what?
Kim Kierke Kardashian.
No.
It's a combination of Kim Kardashian and Kierke God.
Great.
And it says...
It's the philosophy of Kierke God mashed with the tweets and observations of Kim Kardashian.
And it includes things like...
Filling in the eyebrows with a pencil or powder helps eliminate the imperfection
that pertains to everything human.
It's really fun.
That's great.
It's so clever.
Okay, that's it.
That's all of our facts.
Thank you so much for listening.
If you would like to get in contact with any of us about the things we've said over the course of this podcast,
you can get us all on our Twitter accounts.
I'm on @Streiberland.
James.
@Exhaped.
Andy.
@AndruHunterM.
Anna.
You can email podcast@ky.com.
Yep.
And you can also go to nosuchthingasaffish.com
where you can listen to all of our previous episodes.
Thank you so much for listening.
We'll see you again next week.
Goodbye.
[Music]